Blog post: Understanding JWT (#3658)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: astro/src/content/blog/understanding-json-web-tokens-jwt.mdx

---
publish_date: 2025-04-17
title: Understanding JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)
description: You'll dive into the benefits of Authorization Code Grant in simplifying your app's authentication flows.
authors: Kirsten Hunter
categories: Education
image: /img/blogs/understanding-jwt/understanding-jwt.png
tags: JSON web tokens, JWT, 
excerpt_separator: "{/* more */}"
---
import { YouTube } from '@astro-community/astro-embed-youtube';

> Today, we're diving into the world of **JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)** — and we're keeping it simple. Whether you're just getting started with APIs, microservices, or modern authentication, this post will give you a solid foundation on what JWTs are, how they work, and why they're useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Today, you'll be diving into the world of **JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)** — and keeping it simple. Whether you're just getting started with APIs, microservices, or modern authentication, this post will give you a solid foundation on what JWTs are, how they work, and why they're useful.
```

> Today, we're diving into the world of **JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)** — and we're keeping it simple. Whether you're just getting started with APIs, microservices, or modern authentication, this post will give you a solid foundation on what JWTs are, how they work, and why they're useful.

Author: Oh that's interesting.

> Today, we're diving into the world of **JSON Web Tokens (JWTs)** — and we're keeping it simple. Whether you're just getting started with APIs, microservices, or modern authentication, this post will give you a solid foundation on what JWTs are, how they work, and why they're useful.

Author: Thanks. Sent to Lyle for a peek.

{/* more */}

## **What You’ll Cover**

Here’s a quick overview of what you’ll explore:

- What JWTs are and why they matter
- A real-world problem they solve
- How JWTs are structured
- Best practices for storing them
- What refresh tokens are and how they help
- Key takeaways and resources

Let’s get into it.

## **What Are JWTs — And Why Should You Care?**

JWT stands for **JSON Web Token** — and it’s pronounced “jot.”

These little guys are used all over the web, especially in authentication systems. Here’s why they’re so popular:

> - **They’re secure**: JWTs include a **signature** that proves the data hasn’t been tampered with. Think of it like getting your mom’s signature on a permission slip — it validates everything inside.

Author: ```suggestion
- **They’re secure**: JWTs include a **signature** that proves the data hasn’t been tampered with. Think of it like getting a notarized document — it validates that the information has not been changed.
```

> - **They’re secure**: JWTs include a **signature** that proves the data hasn’t been tampered with. Think of it like getting your mom’s signature on a permission slip — it validates everything inside.

Author: Will change. Thanks.

- **They’re stateless**: Servers don’t need to remember anything about the user between requests. The token itself carries all the necessary info.
- **They’re portable**: JWTs are great for APIs and microservices, where lightweight, stateless communication is ideal.
- **They’re supported widely**: Identity providers like FusionAuth, Auth0, Firebase, and Okta issue JWTs, and they’re supported across virtually every programming language.

## **The Problem JWTs Help Solve**

> Let’s say you have two separate APIs — a **User API** for authentication, and a **ToDo API** for managing tasks. You want a client (like a mobile app or frontend) to interact with both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s say you have two separate APIs — a **User API** that handles authentication, and a **ToDo API** for managing tasks. You want a client (like a mobile app or frontend) to interact with both. The **User API** has secure access to the *Users* database, but you don't want the **Todo API** to have direct access to it.
```

The challenge? You need a secure way for the client to prove its identity to each API — without duplicating authentication logic.

> ![Diagram of a simple application](/img/blogs/understanding-jwt/simple-application.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Diagram of a simple application.](/img/blogs/understanding-jwt/simple-application.png)
```

### **Enter JWTs**

> Here’s how JWTs solve the problem:

Author: Could you write me an accurate replacement for this?

> Here’s how JWTs solve the problem:

Reviewer: After reviewing this further, I now think the issue is more the description of the problem. The picture is a picture of the setup of the problem, it just needs better explanation. I will do that in a comment above.

1. There is a private signing key on the server and a corresponding public signing key on the client.
2. The client first contacts the **User API**.
3. The User API authenticates the user and creates a **signed JWT** using the **private key**.
4. The client sends that signed JWT to the **ToDo API** when it makes requests.
5. The ToDo API uses the **public key** to verify that the JWT is authentic and hasn’t been altered.

This is known as **asymmetric signing** — and it ensures security without having to share secrets between services.

## **Breaking Down a JWT**

> ![A breakdown of the elements in a JSON web token JWT](/img/blogs/understanding-jwt/jwt-breakdown.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![A breakdown of the elements in a JSON web token JWT.](/img/blogs/understanding-jwt/jwt-breakdown.png)
```

> ![A breakdown of the elements in a JSON web token JWT](/img/blogs/understanding-jwt/jwt-breakdown.png)

Author: I agree with you. However, when you do a Google Image Search for "JWT components," it seems like literally everyone is using the same diagram. 
<img width="1245" alt="Screenshot 2025-04-17 at 9 47 03 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/330f6189-5359-4bb7-9fe3-d438e2690973" />

2. **Payload** – The main content of the token. This includes **claims**, which are key-value pairs. Some are standardized (like iss for issuer or exp for expiration), while others can be custom.
3. **Signature** – Created by signing the header and payload together. This is what guarantees the token's integrity.

If the data is changed, the signature won’t match — and the token will be rejected.

## **Where Should You Store JWTs?**

Security is everything when it comes to tokens. Here’s where **not** to put them:

- ❌ **LocalStorage or sessionStorage in the browser**: These are accessible by JavaScript, which means they’re vulnerable to **XSS attacks**.

Here’s where you **should** store them:

- ✅ **HttpOnly, secure cookies**: These can’t be accessed by JavaScript, making them much safer. They’re also sent automatically with each request — perfect for session-based auth.
- ✅ **Secure storage on mobile devices**: Use Keychain (iOS) or Keystore (Android). These are built specifically to protect sensitive data.

**Bottom line**: Store your tokens like they’re the keys to your house — because they basically are.

## **What About Refresh Tokens?**

> JWTs usually expire after a short time (for security reasons). But logging the user out every time that happens would be annoying.

Author: ```suggestion
JWTs usually expire after a short time (for security reasons). But it's annoying to users to have to log in every time because their token hasn't refreshed.
```

> JWTs usually expire after a short time (for security reasons). But logging the user out every time that happens would be annoying.

Reviewer: It's not the logging the user out every time that is annoying, it is making the user login every time it happens is what is annoying. Let me know if I am being too picky here.

Author: Will clarify. Thanks.

That’s where **refresh tokens** come in:

> 1. When the **JWT token** expires, the ToDo API rejects it.

Reviewer: Token is redundant.

```suggestion
1. When the **JWT** expires, the ToDo API rejects it.
```

2. The client sends a **refresh token** to the User API.
3. The User API verifies the refresh token and returns a new JWT.
4. The client continues on its merry way.

This flow keeps the user authenticated without constant re-login prompts.

## **Wrapping Up**

JSON Web Tokens are:

> - **Secure**: thanks to cryptographic signatures

Author: Would this work? 

```suggestion
- **Secure**: when the cryptographic signature is verified, and all critical claims (expiration, issuer, and audience) are validated
```

> - **Secure**: thanks to cryptographic signatures

Reviewer: It is more than just the cryptographic signature that makes it secure. The signature is what tells us we can trust what is in the certificate, but you must validate the expiration date and issuer to make it work. (Again, I may be getting picky here, but think it is important.)

Author: Would this work? It's less pithy, but more accurate: 

Secure: when the cryptographic signature is verified, and all critical claims (expiration, issuer, and audience) are validated.

- **Scalable**: perfect for stateless systems like APIs
- **Useful**: when used thoughtfully, they make auth fast and efficient

> But like any tool, JWTs should be used wisely. Make sure you store them securely and choose the right expiration and refresh strategies for your use case.

Author: ```suggestion
But like any tool, JWTs should be [used wisely](/docs/apis/jwt#overview). Make sure you [store them securely](/docs/apis/jwt#response-5) and choose the right expiration and [refresh](/docs/apis/jwt#refresh-a-jwt) strategies for your use case.
```

> But like any tool, JWTs should be used wisely. Make sure you store them securely and choose the right expiration and refresh strategies for your use case.

Reviewer: We should add some links to the docs instead of just using "right" expiration and refresh strategies.
